NEXT-12712 - Add custom pagelet (#65)
shopware/docs: guides/plugins/plugins/storefront/add-custom-controller.md

use Shopware\Storefront\Controller\StorefrontController;

/**
 * @RouteScope(scopes={"storefront"})
 */
class ExampleController extends StorefrontController
{
}
```
{% endcode %}

Now we can create a new example method with a `Route` annotation which has to contain our route, in this case it will be `/example`.
The route defines how our new method will be accessible.

Below you can find an example implementation of a controller method including a route, where we render an `example.html.twig` template file with a template variable `example`.

{% code title="<plugin root>/src/Storefront/Controller/ExampleController.php" %}
```php
<?php declare(strict_types=1);

namespace Swag\BasicExample\Storefront\Controller;

use Shopware\Core\Framework\Routing\Annotation\RouteScope;
use Shopware\Core\System\SalesChannel\SalesChannelContext;
use Shopware\Storefront\Controller\StorefrontController;
use Symfony\Component\HttpFoundation\Request;
use Symfony\Component\HttpFoundation\Response;
use Symfony\Component\Routing\Annotation\Route;

/**
 * @RouteScope(scopes={"storefront"})
 */
class ExampleController extends StorefrontController
{
    /**

>     * @Route("/example", name="frontend.example.example", methods={"GET"})

Reviewer: the name of the route is important. there are two or three keywords a route name should start with. like frontend. otherwise features like SEO won't work

            'example' => 'Hello world'
        ]);
    }
}
```
{% endcode %}

The name of the method does not really matter, but it should somehow fit its purpose.
More important is the `Route` annotation, that points to the route `/example`.
Inside the method, we're using the method `renderStorefront` to render a twig template file in addition with
the template variable `example`, which contains `Hello world`. This template variable will be usable in the rendered
template file.
The method `renderStorefront` then returns a `Response`, as every routed controller method has to.

It is also possible to define the `RouteScope` per route and also multiple scopes at once, as you can see below.

{% code title="<plugin root>/src/Storefront/Controller/ExampleController.php" %}
```php
<?php declare(strict_types=1);

namespace Swag\BasicExample\Storefront\Controller;

use Shopware\Core\Framework\Routing\Annotation\RouteScope;
use Shopware\Storefront\Controller\StorefrontController;
use Symfony\Component\HttpFoundation\Response;
use Symfony\Component\Routing\Annotation\Route;

/**
 * @RouteScope(scopes={"storefront"})
 */
class ExampleController extends StorefrontController
{
    /**

>     * @RouteScope(scopes={"storefront", "custom-scope"})

Reviewer: I won't bring the custom example here. otherwise you need to explain what's its purpose and that would be worth an own article :grin:

# Add custom storefront controller

## Overview

In this guide you'll learn how to create a custom storefront controller.

## Prerequisites

In order to add your own controller for your plugin, you first need a plugin as base.
Therefore, you can refer to the [Plugin Base Guide](../plugin-base-guide.md).

## Adding custom storefront controller

### Storefront Controller class example

First of all we have to create a new controller which extends from the `StorefrontController` class.

> A controller is also just a service which can be registered via the DI-Container.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A controller is also just a service which can be registered via the service container.
```
( Symfony documents their container as service container instead of DI-container )

More important is the `Route` annotation, that points to the route `/example`.
Also note its name, which is also quite important. Make sure to use prefixes `frontend`, `api` or `store-api` here, depending
on what your route does.
Inside the method, we're using the method `renderStorefront` to render a twig template file in addition with
the template variable `example`, which contains `Hello world`. This template variable will be usable in the rendered
template file.
The method `renderStorefront` then returns a `Response`, as every routed controller method has to.

It is also possible to define the `RouteScope` per route and also multiple scopes at once, as you can see below.

{% code title="<plugin root>/src/Storefront/Controller/ExampleController.php" %}
```php
<?php declare(strict_types=1);

namespace Swag\BasicExample\Storefront\Controller;

use Shopware\Core\Framework\Routing\Annotation\RouteScope;
use Shopware\Storefront\Controller\StorefrontController;
use Symfony\Component\HttpFoundation\Response;
use Symfony\Component\Routing\Annotation\Route;

/**
 * @RouteScope(scopes={"storefront"})
 */
class ExampleController extends StorefrontController
{
    /**

>     * @RouteScope(scopes={"storefront", "administration"})

Reviewer: does this work? makes also no sense IMO 😁
Storefront route and admin scope?
maybe we should skip the entirely part about the route scope and we should really consider making an own article about that

Reviewer 3: I changed that because you didn't want the "custom-scope" to be in there.
Yet, I'd really like to have that part "multiple scopes possible" covered. So if you can come up with something better, go for it. :-P

Reviewer: what about the idea to write an own article for the scope?
to be honest, I don't see a benefit to mention it here. I just want to implement a simple controller. custom or multiple route scopes seems more an advanced use case.

it should be mentioned that it is important to set this annotation because of this and that, but that should be sufficient for this guide, in my opinion

    * @Route("/example", name="frontend.example.example", methods={"GET"})
    */
    public function showExample(): Response
    {
        ...
    }
}
```
{% endcode %}

### Services.xml example

> Next, we need to register our controller in the DI-container and make it public.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, we need to register our controller in the service container and make it public.
```

           xsi:schemaLocation="http://symfony.com/schema/dic/services http://symfony.com/schema/dic/services/services-1.0.xsd">

    <services>
        <service id="Swag\BasicExample\Storefront\Controller\ExampleController" public="true"/>
    </services>
</container>
```
{% endcode %}

### Routes.xml example

Once we‘ve registered our new controller, we have to tell Shopware how we want it to search for new routes in our plugin.
This is done with a `routes.xml` file at `<plugin root>/src/Resources/config/` location.
Have a look at the official [Symfony documentation](https://symfony.com/doc/current/routing.html) about routes and how they are registered.

{% code title="<plugin root>/src/Resources/config/routes.xml" %}
```markup
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<routes xmlns="http://symfony.com/schema/routing"
        xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
        xsi:schemaLocation="http://symfony.com/schema/routing
        https://symfony.com/schema/routing/routing-1.0.xsd">

    <import resource="../../Storefront/Controller/**/*Controller.php" type="annotation" />
</routes>
```
{% endcode %}

### Adding template

> Now we registered our controller and Shopware indexes the route, but the template file, that is supposed to be rendered, is still missing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now that we registered our controller and Shopware indexes the route, but the template file, that is supposed to be rendered, is still missing.
```

Let's change that now.

As previously mentioned, the code will try to render an `index.html.twig` file.
Thus we have to create an `index.html.twig` in the `<plugin root>/src/Resources/views/storefront/page/example` directory, as defined in our controller.
Below you can find an example, where we extend from the template `base.html.twig` and override the block `base_content`.
In our [Customize templates guide](./customize-templates.md), you can learn more about customizing templates.

{% code title="<plugin root>/src/Resources/views/storefront/page/example.html.twig" %}

> ```text

Reviewer 2: Why do some of you use \```text and some use \```twig ?
I think twig is working fine

```suggestion
```twig
```

Reviewer 3: Afaik it only works fine because markdown defaults to text if unknown.
Twig is not a valid code markup known to default markdown, is it?

Sure, I can change that, won't break anything. Just... it will default to text anyway. What about HTML?

Reviewer 2: @leichteckig had the same issue with using \```html, she changed it to \```twig. 
Dunno, if this matters at all.

{% sw_extends '@Storefront/storefront/base.html.twig' %}

{% block base_content %}
    <h1>Our example controller!</h1>
{% endblock %}
```
{% endcode %}

### Request and Context

If necessary, we can access the `Request` and `SalesChannelContext` instances in our controller method.

Here's an example:

{% code title="<plugin root>/src/Storefront/Controller/ExampleController.php" %}
```php
<?php declare(strict_types=1);

namespace Swag\BasicExample\Storefront\Controller;

use Shopware\Core\Framework\Routing\Annotation\RouteScope;
use Shopware\Core\System\SalesChannel\SalesChannelContext;
use Shopware\Storefront\Controller\StorefrontController;
use Symfony\Component\HttpFoundation\Request;
use Symfony\Component\HttpFoundation\Response;
use Symfony\Component\Routing\Annotation\Route;

/**
 * @RouteScope(scopes={"storefront"})
 */
class ExampleController extends StorefrontController
{
    /**
    * @Route("/example", name="frontend.example.example", methods={"GET"})
    */
    public function showExample(Request $request, SalesChannelContext $context): Response
    {
        ...
    }
}
```
{% endcode %}

## Next steps

> Now that you know how to create a custom controller, you can make it more beautiful with some styling.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now that you know how to create a custom controller, you can make your templates shiny with some some styling.
```
